README.md, before:

<h1 align="center">WPTechnixWordPress Coding Standards</h1>

<p align="center">
    <strong>WordPress-specific coding standards building upon WPTechnix base standards for modern, secure, and performant code.</strong>
</p>

<p align="center">
    <a href="https://github.com/wptechnix/wordpress-coding-standards"><img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/source-wptechnix/wordpress--coding--standards-blue.svg?style=flat-square" alt="Source Code"></a>
    <a href="https://packagist.org/packages/wptechnix/wordpress-coding-standards"><img src="https://img.shields.io/packagist/v/wptechnix/wordpress-coding-standards.svg?style=flat-square&label=release" alt="Download Package"></a>
    <a href="https://php.net"><img src="https://img.shields.io/packagist/php-v/wptechnix/wordpress-coding-standards.svg?style=flat-square&colorB=%238892BF" alt="PHP Programming Language"></a>
    <a href="https://github.com/wptechnix/wordpress-coding-standards/blob/master/LICENSE"><img src="https://img.shields.io/packagist/l/wptechnix/wordpress-coding-standards.svg?style=flat-square&colorB=darkcyan" alt="Read License"></a>
</p>

## About

This is a coding standard for [PHP_CodeSniffer](https://github.com/squizlabs/PHP_CodeSniffer) designed specifically for WordPress development. It extends the base [WPTechnix Coding Standards](https://github.com/WPTechnix/coding-standards), which already enforces strict types, immutability, and PSR-12 compliance, and incorporates rules from the official [WordPress Coding Standards](https://github.com/WordPress/WordPress-Coding-Standards).

This ruleset is designed to help you write modern, secure, and high-quality WordPress code, with a focus on:

**WordPress Best Practices:**
-   Enforces the use of WordPress functions and APIs over native PHP.
-   Checks for proper use of text domains for internationalization (i18n).
-   Discourages the use of deprecated WordPress functions, classes, and parameters.
-   Verifies correct prefixing and naming conventions for classes and functions.
-   Ensures proper enqueueing of scripts and styles.

**Security:**
-   Requires nonce verification for form and URL processing.
-   Enforces proper data validation and sanitization of all inputs.
-   Mandates output escaping to prevent XSS vulnerabilities.
-   Flags the use of insecure and discouraged PHP and WordPress functions.

**Database:**
-   Discourages direct database queries, promoting the use of WordPress database APIs.
-   Enforces the use of prepared statements to prevent SQL injection attacks.
-   Identifies potentially slow and inefficient database queries.

**Code Quality & Analysis:**
-   Flags the use of development functions (`var_dump`, `error_log`, etc.).
-   Prevents modification of global variables.
-   Enforces strict type checking (e.g., in `in_array`).

## Installation

Install this package as a development dependency using [Composer](https://getcomposer.org).

```bash
composer require --dev wptechnix/wordpress-coding-standards
```

### Automatic Installation with Dealerdirect

This package uses [dealerdirect/phpcodesniffer-composer-installer](https://github.com/Dealerdirect/phpcodesniffer-composer-installer) to automatically register the coding standard with PHP_CodeSniffer. This means:

-   The standard is automatically installed to PHP_CodeSniffer's standards directory upon Composer install.
-   No manual path configuration is required.
-   The standard becomes immediately available for use in your `phpcs.xml` configuration.

If you're using a custom PHP_CodeSniffer installation, ensure the `dealerdirect/phpcodesniffer-composer-installer` plugin is enabled. This package's `composer.json` already allows this plugin automatically.

## Usage

To use this coding standard, add `<rule ref="WPTechnixWordPress"/>` to your `phpcs.xml` configuration.

Here is an example `phpcs.xml.dist` file that you can place in the root of your repository:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<ruleset xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
        xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="vendor/squizlabs/php_codesniffer/phpcs.xsd">

    <arg name="extensions" value="php"/>
    <arg name="colors"/>
    <arg value="sp"/>

    <file>./src</file>
    <file>./tests</file>

    <rule ref="WPTechnixWordPress"/>

</ruleset>
```

Then, run PHP_CodeSniffer:

```bash
./vendor/bin/phpcs
```

To automatically fix violations:

```bash
./vendor/bin/phpcbf
```

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! To contribute, please familiarize yourself with the project's `CONTRIBUTING.md`.

## Copyright and License

The `wptechnix/wordpress-coding-standards` library is copyright © [WPTechnix](https://wptechnix.com) and licensed for use under the terms of the MIT License (MIT). Please see [LICENSE](LICENSE) for more information.

Commit message:

feat(installer): make phpcs-composer-installer optional
Moves dealerdirect/phpcodesniffer-composer-installer from equire to
suggest in composer.json to make its installation optional.

The README.md has been updated to reflect this change, providing clearer
instructions for both automatic and manual configuration of
PHP_CodeSniffer.

This gives users more flexibility in how they manage their dependencies
and PHP_CodeSniffer setup.

README.md, after:

<h1 align="center">WPTechnixWordPress Coding Standards</h1>

<p align="center">
    <strong>WordPress-specific coding standards building upon WPTechnix base standards for modern, secure, and performant code.</strong>
</p>

<p align="center">
    <a href="https://github.com/wptechnix/wordpress-coding-standards"><img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/source-wptechnix/wordpress--coding--standards-blue.svg?style=flat-square" alt="Source Code"></a>
    <a href="https://packagist.org/packages/wptechnix/wordpress-coding-standards"><img src="https://img.shields.io/packagist/v/wptechnix/wordpress-coding-standards.svg?style=flat-square&label=release" alt="Download Package"></a>
    <a href="https://php.net"><img src="https://img.shields.io/packagist/php-v/wptechnix/wordpress-coding-standards.svg?style=flat-square&colorB=%238892BF" alt="PHP Programming Language"></a>
    <a href="https://github.com/wptechnix/wordpress-coding-standards/blob/master/LICENSE"><img src="https://img.shields.io/packagist/l/wptechnix/wordpress-coding-standards.svg?style=flat-square&colorB=darkcyan" alt="Read License"></a>
</p>

## About

This is a coding standard for [PHP_CodeSniffer](https://github.com/squizlabs/PHP_CodeSniffer) designed specifically for WordPress development. It extends the base [WPTechnix Coding Standards](https://github.com/WPTechnix/coding-standards), which already enforces strict types, immutability, and PSR-12 compliance, and incorporates rules from the official [WordPress Coding Standards](https://github.com/WordPress/WordPress-Coding-Standards).

This ruleset is designed to help you write modern, secure, and high-quality WordPress code, with a focus on:

**WordPress Best Practices:**
-   Enforces the use of WordPress functions and APIs over native PHP.
-   Checks for proper use of text domains for internationalization (i18n).
-   Discourages the use of deprecated WordPress functions, classes, and parameters.
-   Verifies correct prefixing and naming conventions for classes and functions.
-   Ensures proper enqueueing of scripts and styles.

**Security:**
-   Requires nonce verification for form and URL processing.
-   Enforces proper data validation and sanitization of all inputs.
-   Mandates output escaping to prevent XSS vulnerabilities.
-   Flags the use of insecure and discouraged PHP and WordPress functions.

**Database:**
-   Discourages direct database queries, promoting the use of WordPress database APIs.
-   Enforces the use of prepared statements to prevent SQL injection attacks.
-   Identifies potentially slow and inefficient database queries.

**Code Quality & Analysis:**
-   Flags the use of development functions (`var_dump`, `error_log`, etc.).
-   Prevents modification of global variables.
-   Enforces strict type checking (e.g., in `in_array`).

## Installation

Install this package as a development dependency using [Composer](https://getcomposer.org).

```bash
composer require --dev wptechnix/wordpress-coding-standards
```

### Optional: Automatic Installation with Dealerdirect

For automatic registration with PHP_CodeSniffer, you can optionally install [dealerdirect/phpcodesniffer-composer-installer](https://github.com/Dealerdirect/phpcodesniffer-composer-installer):

```bash
composer require --dev dealerdirect/phpcodesniffer-composer-installer
```

This plugin will:

-   Automatically register the standard with PHP_CodeSniffer upon Composer install.
-   Eliminate the need for manual path configuration.
-   Make the standard immediately available for use in your `phpcs.xml` configuration.

**Note:** This is optional. If you prefer manual configuration or have a custom PHP_CodeSniffer setup, you can skip this step and configure the path manually in your `phpcs.xml` file.

## Usage

To use this coding standard, add `<rule ref="WPTechnixWordPress"/>` to your `phpcs.xml` configuration.

Here is an example `phpcs.xml.dist` file that you can place in the root of your repository:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<ruleset xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
        xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="vendor/squizlabs/php_codesniffer/phpcs.xsd">

    <arg name="extensions" value="php"/>
    <arg name="colors"/>
    <arg value="sp"/>

    <file>./src</file>
    <file>./tests</file>

    <rule ref="WPTechnixWordPress"/>

</ruleset>
```

Then, run PHP_CodeSniffer:

```bash
./vendor/bin/phpcs
```

To automatically fix violations:

```bash
./vendor/bin/phpcbf
```

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! To contribute, please familiarize yourself with the project's `CONTRIBUTING.md`.

## Copyright and License

The `wptechnix/wordpress-coding-standards` library is copyright © [WPTechnix](https://wptechnix.com) and licensed for use under the terms of the MIT License (MIT). Please see [LICENSE](LICENSE) for more information.
